ePBS specs (#1)
terencechain/consensus-specs: specs/_features/ePBS/builder.md

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

# ePBS -- Honest Builder

**Notice**: This document is a work-in-progress for researchers and implementers.

## Introduction

This document represents the expected behavior of an "honest builder" with respect to ePBS of the Ethereum proof-of-stake protocol. 
This document does not distinguish between a "node" (i.e. the functionality of following and reading the beacon chain) and a "builder" (i.e. the functionality of actively participating in consensus).
The separation of concerns between these (potentially) two pieces of software is left as a design decision that is out of scope.

A builder is an entity that participates in the block building of the Ethereum proof-of-stake protocol. This is an optional role for users in which they can post ETH as collateral and build blocks to see financial returns in exchange for building the protocol.
In this design, builder is an extension of validator using a different withdrawal prefix `0x0b`. The protocol onboards builder by upgrading validators into builders if minimal staked balance is reached.

> ## Becoming a builder

Reviewer: A builder must keep a minimum balance of `BUILDER_MIN_BALANCE` in order to continue performing building duties.

### Initialization

A builder must initialize many parameters locally before submitting a deposit and joining the builder registry.

Refer key general from the phase 0 validator spec.

##### Builder withdrawal credential

Builder Withdrawal credentials with the builder withdrawal prefix specify
a 20-byte Eth1 address `eth1_withdrawal_address` as the recipient for all withdrawals.
The `eth1_withdrawal_address` can be the address of either an externally owned account or of a contract.

The `withdrawal_credentials` field must be such that:

* `withdrawal_credentials[:1] == BUILDER_WITHDRAWAL_PREFIX` [New in ePBS]
* `withdrawal_credentials[1:12] == b'\x00' * 11`
* `withdrawal_credentials[12:] == eth1_withdrawal_address`

### Submit deposit

No change from phase 0 validator spec.

### Process deposit

No change from phase 0 validator spec.

### Activation

No change from phase 0 validator spec.

## Beacon chain responsibilities

### Signed execution payload header envelope proposal

#### Constructing the `SignedExecutionPayloadHeaderEnvelope`

> First, the builder need obtain an execution payload. The builder building on top of block on top of `state` must ake the following actions through execution layer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, the builder needs to obtain an execution payload. The builder building on top of block on top of `state` must take the following actions through execution layer
```

1. Set `payload_id = prepare_execution_payload(state, pow_chain, safe_block_hash, finalized_block_hash, suggested_fee_recipient, execution_engine)`, where:
  * `state` is the state object after applying `process_slots(state, slot)` transition to the resulting state of the parent block processing
  * `safe_block_hash` is the return value of the `get_safe_execution_payload_hash(store: Store)` function call
  * `finalized_block_hash` is the hash of the latest finalized execution payload (`Hash32()` if none yet finalized)
  * `suggested_fee_recipient` is the value suggested to be used for the `fee_recipient` field of the builder

```python

> def prepare_execution_payload(state: BeaconState,

Reviewer: The payload attributes should contain the inclusion list summary at the very least, these are the txs that the payload will need to satisfy. The EL should have already cached the transactions when the builder notified of the IL before.

        blob_gas_used=payload.blob_gas_used,
        excess_blob_gas=payload.excess_blob_gas,
        inclusion_list_summary_root=hash_tree_root(payload.inclusion_list_summary),
        inclusion_list_exclutions_root=hash_tree_root(payload.inclusion_list_exclutions),
    )
```
5. Build `ExecutionPayloadHeaderEnvelope`
- Set `header` to the `ExecutionPayloadHeader` from step 3
- Set `builder_index` to the index of the builder in the beacon state
- Set `value` to the bid value (ie. how much Gwei builder is willing to pay the proposer if the block is included)

6. Sign the `ExecutionPayloadHeaderEnvelope` with the builder's private key

```python
def get_execution_payload_header_envelope(state: BeaconState, header: ExecutionPayloadHeaderEnvelope, privkey: int) -> BLSSignature:
    domain = get_domain(state, DOMAIN_BEACON_BUILDER, compute_epoch_at_slot(state.slot))
    signing_root = compute_signing_root(header, domain)
    return bls.Sign(privkey, signing_root)
```

7. Build `SignedExecutionPayloadHeaderEnvelope`
- Set `header` to the `ExecutionPayloadHeaderEnvelope` from step 4
- Set `signature` to the `BLSSignature` from step 5

#### Broadcast execution payload header envelope

> Finally, the validator broadcasts `signed_execution_payload_header_envelope` to the global `execution_payload_header_envelope` pubsub topic.

Reviewer: Why is this a global topic? only the proposer is interested in receiving this information, can this be made a smaller subset of the P2P network?

Author: Good point. We can make this like the `sync_committee_message` subnet and only subscribe if you are proposing with an epoch look ahead

### Signed execution payload envelope construction 

#### Determine if it is safe to reveal

> The builder will call `get_head_block`. If the head block contains the payload header, then it is safe to reveal.

Reviewer: Not sure what the right wording is here. In principle the builder should reveal if he has seen *any* beacon block which is valid and included his payload. Head or not. The problem is that if the call to `get_head_block` returns another block, it will not have his header. If later the attestations switch back to the intended head, the builder will lose his bid.

#### Constructing the `SignedExecutionPayloadEnvelope`

1. Build `ExecutionPayloadEnvelope`
- Set `payload`  to the saved `execution_payload` from constructing the header.
- Set `builder_index` to the index of the builder.

> - Set `beacon_block_root` to the head block root.

Reviewer: This is not necessarily the head block root, but rather the block root of the block that included his bid

- Set `blob_kzg_commitments` to the kzg commitments from the saved blobs bundle `blobs_bundle.kzg_commitments`.
- Set `state_root` to the state root after processing head block.

2. Sign the `ExecutionPayloadEnvelope` with the builder's private key

```python
def get_execution_payload_envelope(state: BeaconState, payload: ExecutionPayloadEnvelope, privkey: int) -> BLSSignature:
    domain = get_domain(state, DOMAIN_BEACON_BUILDER, compute_epoch_at_slot(state.slot))
    signing_root = compute_signing_root(payload, domain)
    return bls.Sign(privkey, signing_root)
```

3. Build `SignedExecutionPayloadEnvelope`
- Set `message` to the `ExecutionPayloadEnvelope` from step 1
- Set `signature` to the `BLSSignature` from step 2

#### Broadcast execution payload envelope

> Finally, the validator broadcasts `signed_execution_payload_envelope` to the global `execution_payload_envelope` pubsub topic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, the builder broadcasts `signed_execution_payload_envelope` to the global `execution_payload_envelope` pubsub topic.
```

Builder may broadcast `SignedBlobSidecars` before `SignedExecutionPayloadEnvelope` if it is safe to reveal. (ie. the head block contains the payload header)

## Design Decision Rationale

### What are the changes with regard to blob sidecars?
- Builder does not have to commit KZG commitments at the header phase. Given transaction contains versioned hashes, it's committed implicitly there given the transaction root.
- This means KZG will only be known at the payload phase, and the commitments are moved from block body to the execution payload envelope.
- Builder will gossip blob sidecars at the same time as the execution payload envelope. This is to ensure that the blob sidecars are available to the proposer when the proposer is building the block.
- Builder may gossip the blob sidecars earlier than the execution payload.

### How does builder to proposer payment work?

- Builder to proposer payment is unconditional after processing the signed execution payload header and the block remains head and canonical throughout. The builder will not lose the bid if the block is reorged.

> ### Should the builder worry about same slot unbundling?

Reviewer: Do we really need a section about this?

Author: Looking at the current specs, most have design rational sections rather than a separate design doc. I felt like if we were going to production this and get accepted by the upstream authors, a design rational section under respected domain may be the way to go. I don't feel strongly about this though

> - There are cases to consider for same slot unbundling. the common case is proposer equivocate and broadcast the equivocated block to the network after builder has revealed the payload. In this case, the next slot proposer will also have to collude and build on the equivocated block.

Reviewer: Not only the next slot proposer but also a vast majority of the committee since attesters would have voted for the previous head.

> ### What if builder sees proposer equivocate?

Reviewer: Do we need this section specified?
